---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 7th meeting of the Scala Center, Q4 2017

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/007-2017-q4.md).

Scala Center engineering activities for the past quarter focused on
Scala 2.13 collections, macros, Scalafix and Scalameta, Scala compiler
profiling, Zinc, and Bloop.  Progress was made in other areas as well.

Full details on these activities are in
[Heather's report](https://scala.epfl.ch/minutes/ab-reports/2017-q4.html).

Other topics discussed at the meeting included LSP (Language Server Protocol)
support for Scala.

No new proposals were submitted this quarter.

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually, via UberConference, at 4:00pm
(UTC) on Friday, December 1, 2017.

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

### Attendees present

Board members:

- Ross Baker, Verizon
- James Belsey, Morgan Stanley
- Thomas Gawlitza, SAP
- Stu Hood, Twitter
- Lars Hupel, community/Typelevel
- Adriaan Moors, Lightbend
- Juan Pedro Moreno, 47 Degrees (filling in for Raúl)
- Frederick Reiss, IBM
- Bill Venners, community/Artima

Not present:

- Jonathan Perry, Goldman Sachs

Officers:

- Heather Miller (director), EPFL
- Jon Pretty (chairperson), Propensive
- Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
- Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

## Proceedings

As chairperson, Jon Pretty conducted the meeting.

### Activities

As Executive Director, Heather Miller summarized Scala Center
activities since the last meeting.

Most of Heather's remarks were based on her
[detailed report](https://scala.epfl.ch/minutes/ab-reports/2017-q4.html)
on the Center's recent activities.

The report also includes links to multiple blog posts on scala-lang.org
detailing recent work.

These notes are a supplement to Heather's report:

* The engineering staff at the Center is the same as last quarter.

* New to the Center since late October is Darja Jovanovic, an intern.
She's focusing on communication and community organizing, including
Scala Days, the Scala Improvement Process, and the Scala Platform
Process.

* Lars had been working on something Bloop-like and wished he'd known
sooner the Scala Center was doing something similar.  Some discussion
ensued about when the right time to announce new experimental work.
(There are downsides to announcing too early, too.)

* Stu related some history on Zinc and Bloop; Bloop is actually
similar to an earlier, CLI-based iteration of Zinc, which is now
mostly forgotten.  He also brought up the advent of LSP and multiple
efforts (competing? complementary?) to support LSP for Scala. Martin
suggested that Twitter, Lightbend, ENSIME, Dotty, Triplequote, and
other interested parties should get together to discuss LSP.  (This
did end up happening, organized by Jon, on January 11; an account of
that meeting will be published separately.)

* Jon asked what engineers would be doing next quarter.  Heather said
that for the most part engineers would continue with the work they are
already doing.  The most uncertainty is around Martin (Duhem) and
Guillaume (Massé).

* Sam Halliday's proposal on debugger information hasn't been
addressed yet.  Lars had raised this concern with Heather before the
meeting.  The proposal accidentally fell between the cracks considered
this quarter.  Heather will revisit it next quarter (perhaps as a
project for Guillaume).

### Other business

Because there were no new proposals this time, there was lots of
time for open discussion on topics of general concern.  Jon hoped
some future proposals might come out of these discussions.

Bill relayed some community concern about version migrations in the
Scala world.  There is some apprehension about (for example) the moves
to Scala 2.13, Dotty, and Sbt 1.  We should all be keeping migration
pain in mind as a consideration when moving forward.

Jon asked if the concern is mainly about source compatibility or
binary compatibility.  Bill said it's mainly binary compatibility;
everything must be upgraded at once, nothing can move until every
dependency is available for the new version.  Stu expressed his
ongoing interest in source-based dependencies as a way of avoiding
binary compatibility issues; "inlining" or "vendoring" the source
for dependencies can be a solution.

James mentioned migration difficulties around warnings.  Making
warnings fatal in your build greatly aids keeping a codebase clean,
but the all-or-nothing nature of `-Xfatal-warnings`, per-project, is
problematic.  Improved tools for selective suppression of warnings
would be a big help.  Adriaan acknowledged that this is a
long-standing need for many Scala users that hasn't ever quite made it
onto Lightbend's release roadmaps, only because more pressing work
keeps intervening; perhaps there is an opportunity here for a
proposed design to arise from the community.

Jon asked how advisory board members have found hiring Scala
programmers lately, and whether there's anything the Center could do
to help.  Ross described it (not at Verizon, but in his home city of
Indianapolis) as a "chicken and egg" situation where companies are
excited about Scala but think there aren't Scala developers to hire,
while developers are excited too but think the Scala jobs aren't
there.  How does this cycle get broken?  James says at Morgan Stanley
they "take Java developers who are keen and convert them" and doesn't
consider it a significant issue from their perspective.  Nobody
offered a suggestion on something the Center could do in this area.

The discussion turned to factors affecting Scala adoption more
broadly.  Adriaan suggests that tooling quality could be the largest
factor currently holding Scala back.  Ross says some CTOs are
concerned that multiple "dialects" of Scala exist (for example,
pure-functional style vs others) and are apprehensive this could
create division internally.

Jon asked about competition from Kotlin.  (Raul from 47 Degrees is
interested in Kotlin, but wasn't present.)  Bill attended a Kotlin
speakers' dinner as a guest and had the impression that people
interested in Kotlin "never liked Scala anyway", perhaps out of lack
of a strong interest in functional programming.  Lars asked if Kotlin
appealing to a "better Java" audience might free up Scala to focus
more on pure FP.  Martin spoke up to say that he feels strongly that
Scala should be considered neither a "better Java" nor a "Haskell on
the JVM", but a "third style" that is "unique and different" and
"that's what we should emphasize."  Bill points out that "better Java"
might mean something modest or even trivial like "Java without
semicolons", but might also refer to Scala's "third way", whereas he
felt Kotlin really is more firmly aiming to be a "better Java",
strictly speaking.

James mentioned that at Morgan Stanley, Scala's compilation speed is
still very much a concern impacting further adoption internally.  Stu
says that at Twitter, that while they are writing much more new Scala
then Java, overall, there is still some perception that Scala is
"complicated".  There was some also discussion about keeping codebases
modular to reduce compile times, which helps but can also result in
the need for more build machinery.  There is a need for automated
assistance with making codebases more modular; Lars mentioned Haoyi
Li's [Acyclic](https://github.com/lihaoyi/acyclic) as a worthy
example.

Jon asked about board members' experiences sponsoring Scala
conferences.  James said that from a recruitment perspective, which is
their primary motivation for sponsoring, location matters strongly;
Morgan Stanley is much likelier to sponsor an event in a city such as
London where they already have a substantial presence.  Thomas says
sponsorship is also important for a company's image, showing that the
company is involved with new technologies.  Frederick says IBM has
multiple motivations for sponsorships: recruiting, corporate image,
and generating sales leads.  They are often willing to sponsor a
conference once, but then evaluate that first experience carefully
when deciding whether to repeat in subsequent years.

Adriaan mentioned [Bridge Foundry](https://bridgefoundry.org) as a
worthy organization deserving sponsorship.  They coordinate efforts
such as [ScalaBridge](http://www.scalabridge.org), whose goal is
"building an inclusive Scala community".

### Closing remarks

Several board members said that they didn't submit proposals this time
because they're pleased with the work that is already in progress.
Stu mentioned that LSP-related work seemed like a strong candidate for
a future proposal.

The next meeting will be in approximately three months, as usual.
