---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 14th meeting of the Scala Center, Q3 2019

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/014-2019-q3.md).

Lunatech has joined the Advisory Board.  They are represented by Erik
Bakker.

Jamie Thompson, a new engineer, started work at the Center in August.
Ólafur Geirsson left at the end of July.

Scala Center activities for the past quarter focused on dependency
management in sbt, Coursier, MOOCs, Scala 2 and 3 interoperability,
Metals and Bloop, Scala libraries and documentation, implicits,
Scala.js, the SIP process, a contributors' summit, and closing out
Scala Days 2019.

Full details on these activities are in
[Sébastien's report](./2019-09-11-september-11-2019.pdf).

The board discussed (but did not yet vote on) a proposal
([SCP-021](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/021-zinc-improvements.md))
for improvements to Zinc, submitted by Adriaan Moors of Lightbend.

Seb presented thoughts on the future of the Center, the main
themes it intends to address, and how it should interact with
the advisory board to plan that work.

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually on Wednesday, September 11, 2019 at
3:00pm (UTC).

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

Officers:

* Stu Hood (chairperson), Twitter
* Sébastien Doeraene (director), EPFL
* Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
* Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

Board members present:

* Erik Bakker, Lunatech
* James Belsey, Morgan Stanley
* Thomas Gawlitza, SAP
* Oli Makhasoeva, 47 Degrees
* Adriaan Moors, Lightbend
* Rob Norris, community/Typelevel
* Jonathan Perry, Goldman Sachs
* Bill Venners, community/Artima

Apologies:

* Frederick Reiss, IBM
* Julien Tournay, Spotify

## Proceedings

TODO

### Activities

As the Center's Executive Director, Sébastien Doeraene summarized
Scala Center activities since the last meeting.

Most of Seb's remarks were based on his [detailed report](./2019-09-11-september-11-2019.pdf)
on the Center's recent activities.  The following notes are a
supplement to Sébastien's report.

TODO

### Financial report

TODO

### Community feedback

TODO

### Proposals

The following new proposal was discussed by the board, but any formal
vote will wait for a future meeting.

#### SCP-021: Focusing on backwards compatibility for Scala 2.14 and Scala 3.0

Proposed by Adriaan Moors on behalf of Lightbend.  Eugene Yokota,
also of Lightbend, initially drafted the proposal.

"We propose enhancements to the core of the compilation toolchain,
Zinc. Zinc provides Scala compilation services, including incremental
compilation, to build tools and IDEs."  See the [proposal
text](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/proposals/021-zinc-improvements.md)
for details.

TODO

### Other business

TODO

## Conclusion

As usual, the next meeting will be in approximately three months,
likely in early December, almost certainly held virtually.
