---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 21st meeting of the Scala Center, Q2 2021

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

Scala 3 was released in May. The Center's new MOOC, "Effective
Programming in Scala", was also released the same month.

[Databricks](https://databricks.com), known in the Scala community for
their stewardship of Apache Spark, has now joined the advisory
board as a full member and is represented by Kris Mok.  Affiliate
member SwissBorg joined the meeting for the first time, represented by
Nicolas Rémond.

Fengyun Liu, from the engineering team, has left the Center. Valérie
Pedroni has joined the new communications team as an intern.

Center activities for the past quarter focused on the Scala 3 release,
the Scala 3 release party, ScalaCon (including three talks by Center
speakers), the new MOOC, updating most of the existing MOOCs to Scala
3, the Scala 3 documentation website including the Scala 3 book, Let's
Talk About Scala 3 video series, Scala 3 compiler improvements, the
TASTy reader, the Scala 3 migration tool, Scala 3 support in tooling
(Metals, Scalameta, Scalafmt, Scalafix, sbt, Maven plugin, Scastie,
Scaladex), Scala.js, Scala Native, a new sbt-version-policy plugin,
Google Summer of Code, and community management and governance.

Details on all this are in
[Darja's management report](./2021-06-28-darja-june-28-2021.pdf),
[Darja's community management and governance proposal](./2021-06-28-darja-june-28-2021.pdf),
and [Seb's technical report](./2021-06-28-seb-june-28-2021.pdf).

One new proposal was discussed:

* [SCP-026](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/026-solidify-getting-started-with-coursier.md): Solidify Getting Started with Coursier (Chris Kipp (Lunatech) &amp; Rob Norris (community))

The proposal was voted on and accepted.

Other business discussed included the community management and
governance proposal.

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually on Monday, June 28, 2021 at
3:00pm (UTC).

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

Officers:

* Adriaan Moors (chairperson)
  * also board member, representing Lightbend
* Darja Jovanovic (executive director), EPFL
* Sébastien Doeraene (technical director), EPFL
* Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
* Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

Board members:

* Diego Alonso, 47 Degrees
* Maureen Elsberry, 47 Degrees
* Graham Griffiths, Goldman Sachs
* Chris Kipp, Lunatech
* Kris Mok, Databricks
* Rob Norris, community/Typelevel
* Krzysztof Romanowski, VirtusLab
* Daniela Sfregola, Morgan Stanley
* Filipe Regadas, Spotify
* Nicolas Rémond, SwissBorg (affiliate member)
* Bill Venners, community/Artima
* Eugene Yokota, Twitter

Apologies:

* none

Guests:

* none

## Activities reports

Darja and Seb summarized Scala Center activities since the last
meeting.

Their remarks were largely based on their reports. The following notes
do not repeat the content of the reports, but only supplement them.

### Management report

* [Darja's management report](./2021-06-28-darja-june-28-2021.pdf)

### Technical report

* [Seb's technical report](./2021-06-28-seb-june-28-2021.pdf).

Seb emphasized that feedback from the board (and from the community)
is especially welcome for scala3-migrate, the TASTy reader, and recent
Scala Native improvements.

Seb's report mentions a proposed new "Standalone Scala" effort.  It was
discussed further as part of the SCP-026 discussion, below.

## Proposals

### SCP-026: Solidify Getting Started with Coursier

The [proposal](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/026-solidify-getting-started-with-coursier.md) was submitted by Chris Kipp (Lunatech) and Rob Norris (community).

Chris presented the proposal. He said that it reflects Lunatech's
experiences educating new Scala programmers as well as Rob's
experiences interacting with Scala beginners. Rob: "There's a steady
drip of people getting super frustrated and confused trying to get
started with Scala. What do I download, where does it go, how do I do
it, how do I get my editor to work."

Chris pointed out that the proposal overlaps with the Standalone Scala
effort, which they didn't know about before. Krzysztof believes their
plans are compatible with the proposal's goals.

Seth said he hoped that Virtus and the Center will look at Dale
Wijnand's [scala-runners project](https://github.com/dwijnand/scala-runners)
as one of their sources of inspiration.

Seb said "we love the proposal" at the Center. "We're glad to see
it. It mentions things that we were already working on, or planning to
work on," and then also has good suggestions they hadn't considered
yet.  He acknowledged the issue with multiple sbt launchers and said
that Coursier-based sbt launcher not being fully ready yet was the
main blocker currently preventing `cs setup` from being the standard
recommendation for beginners.

Martin: "The proposal is spot on. We have to give newcomers better
guidance, and it needs to be the same, if we can, for Scala 2 and
Scala 3."  Darja also expressed support.

Diego expressed support for the proposal and asked about the overlap
with Standalone Scala (aka "scala-cli").  Some discussion about that
with Seb, Krzysztof, and others followed.  We mostly pass over that
here, since that work is still in such early stages. So, more on this
at next meeting.  Krzysztof assured us that before too much longer, scala-cli will
be an open-source and transparent project and all actions related to
the language, documentation, and other key parts of the Scala ecosystem
will be made in consultation with Scala Center and the community.

Eugene asked about the maintenance status of Coursier.  Darja reminded
us that Alexandre Archambault is at VirtusLab now. Krzysztof offered
to be a liaison for board members concerned about Coursier issues.
Seb acknowledged that the Center may need to become more involved.

Daniela expressed concern that the proposal could be too broad in
scope, since it covers both improving the getting-started experience,
and improving tools that are used by everyone for many purposes.  Rob
and Chris thought it remains to be seen to what extent this might turn
into multiple streams of work, once the design questions have been
explored more. Also, Adriaan noted that it's ultimately up to the
Center to bridge the gap between recommendations made by the board and
the technical details of how they end up being addressed.

**Voting**: The proposal was accepted by unanimous vote.

## Other business

### Management and governance

Darja presented the new [community management and governance
proposal](./2021-06-28-darja-june-28-2021.pdf).  Her opening remarks
were based on the slides in the second half of her [management
report](./2021-06-28-darja-june-28-2021.pdf).  The following notes do
not repeat the content of these documents, but only supplement them.

Maureen asked if fundraising for this could or should be more broadly
community-based, instead of only asking the advisory board.  (Answer:
open question, but likely yes.)  She also asked what the expected time
commitment would be for members of the Executive Working Group.
(Answer: open question, but probably 1 or 2 hours/week for six
months.)

Nicolas asked about learning from other communities' experience; Darja
said that the proposal includes budget for a consultant who has
relevant expertise and a track record with the Drupal and Go
communities.

Daniela suggested that any communication around fundraising should
distinguish between what the Center will do regardless, and what it
_could_ do if additional funds are raised.

Several board members said they would check into whether their
companies would be interested in contributing additional funding to
this effort. (At least one member reminded us that the process of
getting permission for this kind of thing can be slow, and that a
document explaining the fundraising goals can't assume familiarity
with community history.)

Several board members expressed interest in participating in the
Executive Working Group.

### Scala on Twitter

Chris asked about the Scala Center's Twitter presence; Darja confirmed
that it's by design that the Center uses
https://twitter.com/scala_lang rather than expect users to follow a
separate account.

Chris also asked if community governance matters, and communications
around Scala more generally, should be understood by the community as
issuing from the Center, or also from other involved parties such as
Lightbend. Darja acknowledged that it's natural for people in the
community to be at least somewhat confused by the different groups
sharing cooperative responsibility for Scala.  She mentioned her talk
"Scala 2 to Scala 3 Transition"
([video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jVj58B0cLKo)), which may be
helpful for people seeking to understand this better. Seth mentioned
that the Scala website attempts to address this right at the top of
the site's [community
page](https://www.scala-lang.org/community/#whos-behind-scala).  Darja
said that the Center would take care to be especially clear about
this in any communication around the community management changes.

### Ammonite

Chris asked about the Center's level of involvement in maintenance of
Ammonite, particularly Scala 3 support. Seb said that although the
Center contributed that support to Ammonite (through a contractor),
that doesn't mean the Center has assumed ongoing responsibility for
it, but he said he would look into whether there's something the
Center could appropriately do about specific issues Chris mentioned.

Some discussion followed about the nature of the Center's agreements
with contractors, within EPFL's constraints.  (Darja added that the
Center's unusually heavy use of contractors in the preparation for the
Scala 3 release was a one-time situation.)

## Conclusion

We ran out of meeting time and didn't elect a new chairman. (Adriaan's
one-year rotation is ending.)  Seb suggested we deal with this
asynchronously, but before the next meeting.

The next meeting will likely take place in September.
