---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 23rd meeting of the Scala Center, Q4 2021

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/023-2021-q4.md).

Center activities for the past quarter focused on MOOCs, Scala 3
documentation, Scala at universities, Scala website modernization, the
Scala 3 video series, participation in conferences, the Scala Center
LinkedIn page, Advent of Code, a forthcoming Scala Online Shop for
crowdfunding, the Inclusive Language Guide, the TASTy reader, Scala 3
support in Scala Native, an "Energy Efficiency of Scala" report,
Scala.js, Scala 3 compiler maintenance, Metals, Bloop, Scaladex,
Coursier, sbt, the Scala Debug Adapter, communication strategy, and
the Center's ongoing commitment to Scala 2.

In 2022, the Center plans to focus on providing robust and seamless
tooling, onboarding newcomers, addressing governance and
sustainability, boosting the adoption of Scala, and giving a positive
image of Scala.

Details on all this are in the directors'
[quarterly report](./2022-01-28-january-28-2022.pdf) and
[report on plans for 2022](./2022-01-28-january-28-2022-julien.pdf).

One new proposal was discussed:

* [SCP-028](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/028-community-delegate-terms.md): Community Delegate Terms (Rob Norris, Bill Venners)

Note that the refactoring proposal from Twitter,
[SCP-027](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/027-refactoring.md),
remains active but discussion of the revised version was postponed
until next meeting.

Other business discussed included finances, Scala 2, community
feedback, and governance.

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually on Friday, January 28, 2022 at
4:00pm (UTC).

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

Officers:

* Chris Kipp (chairperson)
  * also board member, representing Lunatech
* Darja Jovanovic (executive director), EPFL
* Sébastien Doeraene (technical director), EPFL
* Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
* Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

Board members:

* Diego Alonso, 47 Degrees
* Maureen Elsberry, 47 Degrees
* Graham Griffiths, Goldman Sachs
* Rob Norris, community/Typelevel
* Krzysztof Romanowski, VirtusLab
* Daniela Sfregola, Morgan Stanley
* Claire McGinty, Spotify
* Bill Venners, community/Artima
* Eugene Yokota, Twitter

Apologies:

* Kris Mok, Databricks
* Nicolas Rémond, SwissBorg (affiliate member)
* Lukas Rytz, Lightbend
  * Seth Tisue represented Lightbend at this meeting

Guests:

* Adam Goodman, Northwestern University
* Julien Richard-Foy, EPFL

## Activities report

Darja and Seb summarized Scala Center activities since the last
meeting.

Their remarks were partly based on their quarterly report:

* [quarterly report](./2022-01-28-january-28-2022.pdf)

The following notes do not repeat the content of the report, but only
supplement it.

Darja explained that the Center's recent presence and activity on
LinkedIn is intended to reach out to a broader audience that includes
CEO's and managers, not just the CTO's and engineers it usually
communicates with.  She emphasized that the recent focus on
LinkedIn is intended to establish the Center's presence there, but
other avenues of publicity won't be neglected going forward.

Seb reiterated the Center's ongoing commitment to Scala 2, in response
to feedback at the last meeting.  "The Scala 2 compiler is left to the
care of Lightbend," primarily, but the Center remains committed to
including Scala 2 in its efforts around tooling, documentation, and
community. They also intend to keep offering the existing Scala 2
based online courses.  Starting this quarter, the Center's technical
report takes care to highlight which work items apply to which Scala
versions.

Seb mentioned that the Center's "Inclusive Language Guide" is now
available [on
scala-lang.org](https://www.scala-lang.org/contribute/inclusive-language/).
The guidelines have been applied to the Center's own repos; if you
notice anything that was missed, please let the Center know.
The guide has been publicized on LinkedIn; several board members
expressed an interest in seeing it publicized elsewhere as well.

## Financial report

This was presented by Darja.

She said that the Center received some additional funds in Q4
from EPFL. The additional funds will be applied to the governance
project, the upcoming 5-year report, and other activities.

The Center's income in 2021 was 1'018'575 CHF: 37.7% from reserves,
33.1% from membership, 24.3% from MOOCS, and 5.0% from other sources.
Its expenditures were 917'951 CHF: 90.9% salaries, 8.3% consultants,
and 0.9% other.

The 2022 forecast is for income and expenditures of 827'000 CHF; the
amount is lower because 2021's level of expenditures from reserves was
unusually high.  The Center is also exploring a "preferred" scenario
with a budget of 974'000 CHF, if this can be achieved via increased
board membership, crowdfunding, and partnerships.

The Center's forthcoming 5-year report will include more information
about the Center's financial goals and plans.

## Plans for 2022

Julien Richard-Foy, longtime employee of the Center, attended the
meeting as a guest and presented this report on the Center's plans for
2022:

* [report on plans for 2022](./2022-01-28-january-28-2022.pdf)

with special emphasis on planned activities in the first quarter of
the year.

## Proposals

### SCP-027: Refactoring

This proposal from Twitter,
[SCP-027](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/027-refactoring.md),
has been revised in response to feedback at the last meeting, but the
revisions were made too close to meeting time to permit proper
discussion of the revised version. We intend to return to it next
meeting.

### SCP-028: Community Delegate Terms

The
[proposal](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/028-community-delegate-terms.md)
was submitted by both community representatives, Bill Venners and Rob
Norris.

It seeks to establish a standard term of two years for community
representatives.  (Representatives can still potentially serve
multiple terms.)

**Voting**: The proposal was unanimously approved.

As always, votes are advisory; there isn't yet any clear timetable on
when action might be taken on this.  Darja mentioned that it's
possible that the governance project will result in further changes in
this area.

### Past proposals

Our new chair, Chris, recently made a pass over all of the past
proposals the board has considered and updated their statuses.  The
updated list is [viewable on
GitHub](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/README.md).

## Other business

### Scala 2

On behalf of the Scala team at Lightbend, Seth presented some
Scala 2 news items:

Scala 2.13.8 was released.  This was a modest release focused on
fixing regressions in 2.13.7 (which was a more ambitious release
containing six months of changes).  2.13.8 seems to have been
well-received; there is no need to rush out a 2.13.9.

Changes to the Scala 2 release process, discussed at previous
meetings, have been made. There is now a longer delay between
designating a release candidate and promoting it to final release; the
release announcement doesn't go out until tooling has been updated to
support the new version; Scala Steward upgrade PRs don't go out
until after the release has been announced; and communication
among stakeholders during the entire process is improved.

Lightbend completed handoff of the Play Framework to Open
Collective. The crew of maintainers includes current and former
Lightbend employees.  They've done one release already, independently
of the company. They're working on supporting Scala 3, JDK 17, and
newer sbt.

Lightbend is working on improving JDK 17 support across our whole
stack.

One board member asked how long Scala 2.12 and 2.13 maintenance and
releases will continue at Lightbend.  Seth said that the team expects
to keep the 2.13 series going indefinitely. How long 2.12 releases
will continue is less clear, but there's no danger of releases
stopping anytime soon, and any change in long-term plans would be
announced well in advance.

### Community feedback

Several board members asked about Coursier's maintenance status and
about how scala-cli fits into SCP-026, the proposal about Coursier's
role in the Scala getting-started experience, which the Center is
still working on. There wasn't time to into detail about it, but Seb
and Krzysztof said that technical progress is ongoing and the design
questions about how these tools will relate are under active
discussion between the Center and VirtusLab.  "We're aware."

Bill observed that in-person conferences could become possible again
before too much longer. "It was a pretty big loss for our community
that we couldn't get together in person," so it's worth starting to
plan what COVID rules will be necessary.  Rob also expressed optimism
that resuming in-person conferences could be good for the community;
"the inability to get together in person can inflame
misunderstandings".

Other community observations from Rob: "People really enjoyed the
Center's Advent of Code series. People are starting to use scala-cli
and are very enthusiastic about it. And there continue to be more and
more questions about Scala 3." He did an informal poll on Twitter
asking what was holding people from back from moving to Scala 3 and
metaprogramming was by far the most common answer.

So, he expressed interest in increased representation on Discord from
people directly involved with Scala 3, especially around
metaprogramming. One board member observed that time zone differences
are difficult for chat; could "office hours" be a solution? Another
observed that information in chat tends to get lost, so chat is only a
partial solution. Seb mentioned that the Scala 3 issue sprees are one
of LAMP's efforts in this area, and perhaps that scope of that could
be broadened to include more on metaprogramming.

Chris reminded the board that proposals to the Center can be small
and modest; the proposal discussed today was an example of that.

### Governance

Adam Goodman was present at the meeting as a guest.  He introduced
himself as follows: "I'm a professor at Northwestern University, which
is based just outside of Chicago. I'm an advisor on helping you put
together a more robust governance model. The university has a center
for leadership, which is my primary academic field." He is experienced
with community-based governance, including open-source communities.

Darja presented the following proposed timeline for the governance
project: Q1 mapping out and understanding, Q2 approving, and Q3
implementation.  Some work already happened in Q1 compiling a map of
relevant stakeholders, including stakeholders (or potential ones) we
aren't currently hearing from.  Adam said that in Q1 he'd be
scheduling individual meetings with all board members to get their
perspectives.

## Conclusion

Since this meeting occurred somewhat late, we should aim to meet again
in late March or early April.
