---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 24th meeting of the Scala Center, Q1 2022

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/master/agendas/024-2022-q1.md).

Center activities for the past quarter focused on Scaladex, the Scala
website, improving the getting-started experience, the Inclusive
Language Guide, GitHub security alerts for sbt projects, TASTy-query,
Scala.js, Metals, Bloop, a plan to offer 1-on-1 meetings with Scala
MOOC instructors, the Unified Scala.js Ecosystem project, a plan to
offer Scala instruction to refugees from Ukraine and elsewhere, Dotty
project health monitoring, a forthcoming Scala Compiler Academy,
planning a Scala in Science workshop, Google Summer of Code,
and the governance project.

Details on all this are in the directors' activity report:

* [summary](https://contributors.scala-lang.org/t/scala-center-q1-2022-update/5680)
* [slides](./2022-04-08-april-8-2022-activities.pdf)
* [full report](https://scala.epfl.ch/records/2022-Q1-activity-report.html)

The board welcomes new affiliate member company [Knoldus
Inc.](https://www.knoldus.com), based in India with offices in
multiple countries, represented by Vikas Hazrati. They have been
active champions of Scala since 2010.

Julien Richard-Foy is the Center's new technical director, replacing
Sébastien Doeraene (who will remain employed by the Center).

Bill Venners and Rob Norris are both now concluding their terms as
community representatives, as per
[SCP-028](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/028-community-delegate-terms.md).
The Center will appoint new representatives before the next meeting.

The revised refactoring proposal,
[SCP-027](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/027-refactoring.md)
was accepted on the condition that a working group will be formed to
refine it further before any work begins.

No new proposals were received this quarter.

Other business discussed included the status of old proposals, and
Scala 2 news and updates.

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually on Friday, April 8, 2022 at
3:00pm (UTC).

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

Officers:

* Chris Kipp (chairperson)
  * also board member, representing Lunatech
* Darja Jovanovic (executive director), EPFL
* Julien Richard-Foy (technical director), EPFL
* Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
* Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

Board members:

* Diego Alonso, 47 Degrees
* Maureen Elsberry, 47 Degrees
* Elmer Tan, Goldman Sachs
  * (filling in for Graham Griffiths)
* Claire McGinty, Spotify
* Rob Norris, community/Typelevel
* Krzysztof Romanowski, VirtusLab
* Lukas Rytz, Lightbend
* Daniela Sfregola, Morgan Stanley
* Bill Venners, community/Artima
* Eugene Yokota, Twitter

Apologies:

* Kris Mok, Databricks

Guests:

* Adam Goodman, Northwestern University

## Management report

This was presented by Darja.

She called the board's attention to the Center's blog post about the
war in Ukraine, published in March:
https://scala-lang.org/blog-detail/2022/03/04/in-support-of-ukraine.html
.  She also said the Center will be working with a Swiss organization,
[Power Coders](https://powercoders.org), that offers technical
training and job-search assistance to refugees (from Ukraine and
elsewhere). She encouraged board members to offer internships
through this organization if they can.

Staff changes: Vincent Derouand (communications), Vincenzo Bazzucchi
(engineer), and Meriam Lachkar (engineer) are leaving the
Center. Anatolii Kmetiuk (engineer) has joined the Center full-time;
Valérie Pedroni (communications) has concluded her internship but is
now employed by the Center at 60% time; Léa Coupy (communications) is
starting an internship.

Julien Richard-Foy is the Center's new technical director, replacing
Sébastien Doeraene. Seb remains employed by the Center as a principal
engineer.

On the communications side, Darja praised the communication team's
efforts on promoting the Center's MOOCs on LinkedIn and elsewhere.

The Center has scheduled its first public in-person event since before
the pandemic, a workshop on "Contributing to Scala" in Lausanne on
April 11.

The Center is working with the Extension School at EPFL to expand the
Center's education offerings to include the option for students in the
Center's courses to pay for 1-on-1 sessions with instructors,
hopefully to begin in June.  Companies could sponsor this for their
employees; Darja asked board members to "Please put us in touch with
your colleagues who can advise us about your company's needs and
appropriate pricing."

Work on the Center's 5-year report is ongoing.

The governance project is proceeding, with special funding from EPFL
and with the assistance of Adam Goodman. "Main goals: ensure
communnity trust and growth" and "building a healthier community",
within an appropriate "scope and frame of responsibilities" for the
Center as an "initiator and facilitator".  A series of workshops,
discussions, and drafting sessions are in progress at the Center on
the subjects of governance, moderation, language change (the Scala
Improvement Process), revisions to the Center's membership
regulations, and other areas.

## Financial report

This was also presented by Darja.

MOOC revenue remained approximately steady this quarter.

"We are currently at full capacity and no new engineer job post will
open" in the near future, she said. Expanding the communications
department will facilitate developing and implementing governance.

## Technical report

Julien summarized Scala Center activities since the last meeting.

His remarks were based on the Center's quarterly activity report:

* [summary](https://contributors.scala-lang.org/t/scala-center-q1-2022-update/5680)
* [slides](./2022-04-08-april-8-2022-activities.pdf)
* [full report](https://scala.epfl.ch/records/2022-Q1-activity-report.html)

The following notes do not repeat the content of the report, but only
supplement it.

The Inclusive Language Guide was publicized by this blog post, published
April 5: https://scala-lang.org/blog-detail/2022/04/05/inclusive-language-guide.html

Scaladex seeks contributors from the community; a number of technical
improvements have recently been made, and the issue backlog groomed,
to facilitate external contribution.  See this blog post, published
March 8: https://scala-lang.org/blog/2022/03/08/finding-awesome-libraries.html

See also the Center's Q2 roadmap, [on the web](https://scala.epfl.ch/projects.html)
or [as a PDF](./2022-04-08-april-8-2022-roadmap.pdf).

## Proposals

### SCP-027: Refactoring

This proposal from Twitter,
[SCP-027](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/proposals/027-refactoring.md),
was discussed again, after being revised in response to feedback from
the Center and the board.

One board member summarized feedback from Metals contributors. They
seemed most positive about the feasibility and desirability of
supporting basic rename-refactoring without requiring hand-authoring
of Scalafix rules, but thought the scope might need to be reduced in
other respects (for example, the UI aspects and the ability to modify
project structure).

Board members also asked: will there be command-line support, or will
this only work through BSP? And what will Scalafix's role be in the
implementation? Could supporting easy authoring of Scalafix rules be
the implementation route, so that existing infrastructure for running
Scalafix rules (including across monorepos) could be reused? And if
some of that infrastructure is missing or isn't usable enough, could
it be improved?

It was suggested to form a working group to discuss further, so the
chair asked board members to vote on whether the proposal should be
accepted as-is, accepted but refined and clarified before work begins,
or rejected. Everyone voted to accept-but-refine.

### Older proposals

Chris, as chair, ran through the status of various older proposals.

Based on the feedback from the board and the Center, after the meeting
Chris submitted [a pull
request](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/pull/96) to
update the proposal statuses in the scalacenter/advisoryboard
repository. That PR closes the
[issue](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/issues/85) he had
opened in January. See those links for details.

## Bill's statement

Bill Venners has been serving as community representative on the board since 2016. He writes:

> I've had the honor to serve as community representative on the Scala Center Advisory Board for the past six years. At the most recent board meeting, I stepped down to make room for new voices. At my final meeting I gave this parting message on compassion: https://www.artima.com/articles/compassion-in-our-community

Darja thanked both Bill and Rob for their volunteer service. (Bill, since 2016; Rob, since 2019.)

## Other business

### Scala 2

Seth announced that the team at Lightbend is beginning to prepare
Scala 2.12.16 and Scala 2.13.9 releases.  After the meeting, he
started these threads to discuss contents and timing:

* [Scala 2.12.16 release planning](https://contributors.scala-lang.org/t/scala-2-12-16-release-planning/5692)
* [Scala 2.13.9 release planning](https://contributors.scala-lang.org/t/scala-2-13-9-release-planning/5693)

## Conclusion

We should aim to hold the next meeting around the start of July.
