---
layout: contact
---

# Minutes of the 32nd meeting of the Scala Center, Q1 2024

Minutes are [archived](https://scala.epfl.ch/records.html) on the
Scala Center website.

## Summary

The following agenda was distributed to attendees:
[agenda](https://github.com/scalacenter/advisoryboard/blob/main/agendas/032-2024-q1.md).

We were joined by two new board members, Dmitrii Naumenko (JetBrains)
and Zainab Ali (community representative).

Center activities for the past quarter focused on pipelined
compilation (Scala 3), TASTy Reader (Scala 2), Scala.js minifier (2
and 3), WebAssembly backend for Scala.js (2 and 3), Metals debugger (2
and 3), presentation compiler (3), sbt 2.x (2 and 3), the Scala
Ambassadors initiative, Google Summer of Code, conferences (Scala.IO
and Scalar), compiler sprees, combating Scala website scammers,
and fundraising.

Details are below and in the Center's activity report:

* [report](https://scala.epfl.ch/records/2024-Q1-activity-report.html)

No new proposals were received this quarter.

Other topics covered included Scala Days community discussions around
"lean Scala" and "direct style" and related concepts, Scala LTS
vs. Scala Next, the Scala Native 0.5 upgrade, and more.

## Date, Time and Location

The meeting took place virtually on Friday, April 25, 2024 at
15:00 (UTC).

Minutes were taken by Seth Tisue (secretary).

## Attendees

Officers:

* Chris Kipp (chairperson)
* Darja Jovanovic (executive director), EPFL
* Sébastien Doeraene (interim technical director), EPFL
* Martin Odersky (technical advisor), EPFL
* Seth Tisue (secretary), Lightbend

Board members:

* Zainab Ali, community representative
* Krzysztof Borowski, VirtusLab
* Dmitrii Naumenko, JetBrains
* Lukas Rytz, Lightbend
* Daniela Sfregola, Morgan Stanley
* Eugene Yokota, community representative

Apologies:

* Michel Davit, Spotify

## Introduction

Our two new board members introduced themselves.

Dmitrii Naumenko will represent JetBrains, who have just finished
joining the board. Dmitrii is the leader of the IntelliJ Scala plugin
team there.

Zainab Ali is a new community representative, serving alongside Eugene
Yokota. She has been organizing the London Scala Users Group for the
last five years or so. She describes herself as a functional Scala
developer who does training in the functional space.

## Technical report

Seb, as interim technical director, summarized Scala Center activities
since the last meeting. His remarks were based on the Center's more
detailed Q1 quarterly activity report:

* [report](https://scala.epfl.ch/records/2024-Q1-activity-report.html)

And the Center's Q2 roadmap:

* [roadmap](https://scala.epfl.ch/records/2024-Q2-roadmap.html)

The following notes do not repeat the contents of the report and
roadmap, but only supplement them.

(No questions were asked about Seb's updates, so there are no further
notes here.)

## Management and financial report

Darja presented this section.

In February, the Center published their [2024
roadmap](https://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2024/02/06/scala-center-2024-roadmap.html).

The Center published two blog posts about scammers targeting Scala users:

* https://scala-lang.org/blog/2024/03/01/fake-scala-courses.html
* https://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2024/03/18/scam-response.html

Combating these scams consumed considerable time and effort, but the
good news is that the scamming activity did stop.

At the Scalar conference in Warsaw, the Center organized a meeting of
conference and meetup organizers and also launched the new [Scala
Ambassadors program](https://scala-lang.org/blog/2024/03/28/ambassadors-initiative.html).

The Center's participation in Google Summer of Code for 2024 is moving
ahead.

The Center's moderation team met in person in Lausanne to share knowledge
and experiences and to discuss and strategize.

The Center's governance project made progress which Darja summarized.
That work was eventually completed later in the year, as described
in this October 2024 blog post:

* https://www.scala-lang.org/news/new-governance.html

Several engineers completed their time at the Center and moved on:
Anatolii Kmetiuk, Jamie Thompson, and Jedrzej Rochala.  Seb will be
teaching part-time at EPFL, so his effort level at the Center will be
reduced to 50%.  Hiring new engineers would require new funding.

The Center's 2024 roadmap reflects the smaller size of the engineering
team. Center staff will travel less unless the travel is sponsored.
The Center will continue to "support, empower, and amplify" active
Scala communities and community members to accomplish things that the
Center itself cannot.

The Center continues to collect income from its MOOCs, but the amount
continues to gradually decline.

Fundraising efforts are ongoing. Multiple leads are being pursued.

The effort to revive Scala Days for 2025 is ongoing. In the meantime,
the Scala website's [events page](https://www.scala-lang.org/events/)
is kept up to date with upcoming events.

## Scala 2 report

This was presented by Lukas.

Since the last meeting, Scala 2.12.19 and 2.13.13 were released,
and 2.13.14 is almost ready. The 2.13.14 cycle was short because
of a few regressions. 2.13.14 introduces `-Xsource-features`.

Lukas contributed an sbt PR, now merged, which aligns sbt with
[SIP-51](https://docs.scala-lang.org/sips/drop-stdlib-forwards-bin-compat.html),
which will allow the Scala 2.13 standard library (which is also used
by Scala 3) to make additions again. A process for that will need
to be set up.

## Community report

This section was led by Eugene and Zainab.

They said that in the community there is a great deal of discussion,
some confusion and uncertainty, and even some tension around the
following complex of issues and developments: effect systems, the
advent of Project Loom, the concept of "direct style", and Martin's
[blog post](https://odersky.github.io/blog/2024-04-11-post.html) about
"lean Scala". Discussion involving nearly the entire board ensued.

Eugene said there was also some confusion in the community about Scala
LTS vs Scala Next. As will be described in the next minutes, Zainab
later submitted a proposal asking the Center to provide clearer public
guidance on this, and that proposal was completed by the publication
of [this new page](https://scala-lang.org/development/).

Zainab praised the organizers gathering at Scalar in Warsaw in March,
which was "useful" in strengthening networking between conference and
meetup organizers. In London they are hoping to do even more events
besides just talks, such as workshops, open-source sprees, and katas.
She also expressed hope that the Center's new [Scala
Ambassadors](https://scala-lang.org/blog/2024/03/28/ambassadors-initiative.html)
initiative will help onboard people who want to get more involved with
community.

Zainab mentioned that pushing the Scala Native 0.4 to 0.5 upgrade
through the open source ecosystem has been difficult. In response, Seb
recalled when Scala.js went from 0.6 to 1.0, a transition he described
as "difficult and long", yet necessary. Scala Native 0.4 was 3 to 4
years ago, so the big jump to 0.5 is now "unfortunately necessary",
but the Native team "very much hopes" that this is "the last one
before 1.0", which is probably "a few years down the line".  Eugene
added that setting up a Scala.js or Scala Native community build, like
the existing JVM-centric Scala 2 and Scala 3 community builds, could
really help (if resources could be found for such an effort). Seth
added that library maintainers shouldn't be shy about requesting help
from Scala Native enthusiasts, rather than feeling obligated to sort
out problems themselves.

## Conclusion

Darja intends to organize an in-person advisory board meeting to be
held at EPFL in the fall. Everyone on the board indicated they would
make an effort to attend. (The in-person meeting did in fact occur, in
September, and it will be covered in the next minutes.)
